# Terra Code of Conduct

Like the technical community as a whole, the Terra community is made up of a
mixture of professionals and volunteers from all over the world, working on
every aspect of the mission---including mentorship, teaching, and connecting
people.

Diversity is one of our huge strengths, but it can also lead to
communication issues and unhappiness. To that end, we have a few ground
rules that we ask people to adhere to. This code applies equally to
founders, mentors and those seeking help and guidance.

This isn't an exhaustive list of things that you can't do. Rather, take it
in the spirit in which it's intended---a guide to make it easier to enrich
all of us and the technical communities in which we participate.

This code of conduct applies to all spaces managed by the Terra
project. This includes Zulip, the mailing lists, the issue tracker, and any
other forums created by the project team which the community uses for
communication. In addition, violations of this code outside these spaces may
affect a person's ability to participate within them.

If you believe someone is violating the code of conduct, we ask that you
report it by emailing
[terra-mods@googlegroups.com](mailto:terra-mods@googlegroups.com). For more
details please see our [Reporting Guidelines](#reporting-guidelines).

  * **Be friendly and patient.**

  * **Be welcoming.** We strive to be a community that welcomes and supports
    people of all backgrounds and identities. This includes, but is not
    limited to members of any race, ethnicity, culture, national origin,
    colour, immigration status, social and economic class, educational
    level, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, age,
    size, family status, political belief, religion, and mental and physical
    ability.

  * **Be considerate.** Your work will be used by other people, and you in
    turn will depend on the work of others. Any decision you take will
    affect users and colleagues, and you should take those consequences into
    account when making decisions. Remember that we're a world-wide
    community, so you might not be communicating in someone else's primary
    language.

  * **Be respectful.** Not all of us will agree all the time, but
    disagreement is no excuse for poor behavior and poor manners. We might
    all experience some frustration now and then, but we cannot allow that
    frustration to turn into a personal attack. It's important to remember
    that a community where people feel uncomfortable or threatened is not a
    productive one. Members of the Terra community should be respectful
    when dealing with other members as well as with people outside the
    Terra community.

  * **Be careful in the words that you choose.** We are a community of
    professionals, and we conduct ourselves professionally. Be kind to
    others. Do not insult or put down other participants. Harassment and
    other exclusionary behavior aren't acceptable. This includes, but is not
    limited to:

      * Violent threats or language directed against another person.
      * Discriminatory jokes and language.
      * Posting sexually explicit or violent material.
      * Posting (or threatening to post) other people's personally
        identifying information ("doxing").
      * Personal insults, especially those using racist or sexist terms.
      * Unwelcome sexual attention.
      * Advocating for, or encouraging, any of the above behavior.
      * Repeated harassment of others. In general, if someone asks you to
        stop, then stop.

   * When we disagree, try to understand why. Disagreements, both social and
     technical, happen all the time and Terra is no exception. It is
     important that we resolve disagreements and differing views
     constructively. Remember that we're different. The strength of Terra
     comes from its varied community, people from a wide range of
     backgrounds. Different people have different perspectives on
     issues. Being unable to understand why someone holds a viewpoint
     doesn't mean that they're wrong. Don't forget that it is human to err
     and blaming each other doesn't get us anywhere. Instead, focus on
     helping to resolve issues and learning from mistakes.

Original text courtesy of the
[Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/conduct/) project.

## Reporting Guidelines

If you believe someone is violating the code of conduct we ask that you
report it by emailing
[terra-mods@googlegroups.com](mailto:terra-mods@googlegroups.com) (monitored
by Elliott Slaughter). All reports will be kept confidential. In some cases
we may determine that a public statement will need to be made. If that's the
case, the identities of all victims and reporters will remain confidential
unless those individuals instruct us otherwise.

If you believe anyone is in physical danger, please notify appropriate law
enforcement first. If you are unsure what law enforcement agency is
appropriate, please include this in your report and we will attempt to
notify them.

If you are unsure whether the incident is a violation, or whether the space
where it happened is covered by this Code of Conduct, we encourage you to
still report it. We would much rather have a few extra reports where we
decide to take no action, rather than miss a report of an actual
violation. We do not look negatively on you if we find the incident is not a
violation. And knowing about incidents that are not violations, or happen
outside our spaces, can also help us to improve the Code of Conduct or the
processes surrounding it.

In your report please include:

  * Your contact info (so we can get in touch with you if we need to follow
    up).
  * Names (real, nicknames, or pseudonyms) of any individuals involved. If
    there were other witnesses besides you, please try to include them as
    well.
  * When and where the incident occurred. Please be as specific as possible.
  * Your account of what occurred. If there is a publicly available record
    (e.g. a mailing list archive or a public IRC logger) please include a
    link.
  * Any extra context you believe existed for the incident.
  * If you believe this incident is ongoing.
  * Any other information you believe we should have.

What happens after you file a report?

You will receive an email from us acknowledging receipt, usually within 24
hours (though we aim for much quicker than that).

We will review the incident and determine:

  * What happened.
  * Whether this event constitutes a code of conduct violation.
  * Who the bad actor was.
  * Whether this is an ongoing situation, or if there is a threat to
    anyone's physical safety.

If this is determined to be an ongoing incident or a threat to physical
safety, our immediate priority will be to protect everyone involved. This
means we may delay an "official" response until we believe that the
situation has ended and that everyone is physically safe.

Once we have a complete account of the events we will make a decision as to
how to response. Responses may include:

  * Nothing (if we determine no violation occurred).
  * A private reprimand to the individual(s) involved.
  * A public reprimand.
  * An imposed vacation (i.e. asking someone to "take a week off" from a
    mailing list or Zulip).
  * A permanent or temporary ban from some or all Terra spaces (mailing
    lists, IRC, etc.)
  * A request for a public or private apology.

We'll respond within one week to the person who filed the report with either
a resolution or an explanation of why the situation is not yet resolved.

Once we've determined our final action, we'll contact the original reporter
to let them know what action (if any) we'll be taking. We'll take into
account feedback from the reporter on the appropriateness of our response,
but we don't guarantee we'll act on it.
